New Thread
Press Enter to send, Shift + Enter for new line
Attach
Your message:

I don't understand the core problem of this paper, how is it possible for a kernel to be memory unsafe? is it just because the gpu runs out of memory and the values overlap? Doesn't XLA always produce correct kernels
memsafeXLA.pdf
Attach
Assistant Reply:

Great question. “Memory safe” here doesn’t mean “no buffer overflows or corruption.” XLA-generated kernels are indeed functionally correct in that sense. The paper’s “memory safety” is about not exceeding device memory limits during execution.

What’s the real problem?

    Many ML algorithms (kNN, kernel methods, transformers) build or touch very large intermediate tensors, e.g., an m×n pairwise distance matrix or an n×n kernel matrix.
    A straightforward, convenient implementation often materializes these intermediates. On a GPU with, say, 16–40 GB, that can be impossible: n=10^6 implies an 8 TB dense double-precision matrix. Even much smaller sizes can exceed memory.
    On GPUs, allocating beyond physical memory typically triggers an immediate out-of-memory (OOM) error; execution halts. That’s the “memory-unsafe” behavior the authors want to prevent at the compiler level—not incorrect results, but failure to run due to OOM.

Why doesn’t XLA already prevent this?

    XLA focuses primarily on speed optimizations (fusion, CSE, DCE, etc.). It can and does create big fused kernels that are fast but may still require materializing large intermediates or multiple large buffers to be live at once.
    XLA’s default memory scheduler isn’t aware of a user memory budget. It schedules ops when dependencies are ready, not when memory headroom is sufficient. So even if an expression could be computed in chunks, the naive schedule may still try to allocate several large tensors concurrently, causing OOM.
    XLA lacks higher-level linear algebra “tricks” by default (e.g., pairwise distance without n×m×d broadcast, or reordering chains ABv to A(Bv)) and graph-level splitting into slices with reduce-style recomposition.

What does the paper add?

    Match-and-replace: Recognize patterns like naive Euclidean distances and rewrite them to avoid huge temporaries (avoid n×m×d, keep to n×m).
    Reordering: Change evaluation order (e.g., compute Bv first) to keep intermediates small.
    Graph splitting with while loops: Automatically slice large-tensor producers along “splittable” axes, compute per-chunk results, and reduce/accumulate them, respecting a user-specified memory limit (e.g., XLA_FLAGS="--xla_tensor_size_threshold=1GB --xla_tensor_split_size=500MB").

So, does XLA produce “correct kernels”?

    Yes, in the sense of correctness and no overlapping writes or buffer corruption.
    But without the paper’s memory-aware passes, XLA may still emit a schedule that tries to allocate intermediates larger than the device can hold, causing OOM. The extension aims to make executions “memory safe” under a user-defined budget by restructuring the computation graph so that peak live memory stays below the threshold, without changing user Python code.

GPT-5
35.26 tok/sec
611 tokens
Time-to-First: 2.5 sec
Your message:

what occurs normally during an OOM? does the computation restart?
Attach
Assistant Reply:

Short answer: No, it doesn’t restart. An OOM usually aborts the current computation and raises an error; you must change something and rerun.

What typically happens on GPUs/TPUs with XLA/JAX/TensorFlow/PyTorch:

    Allocation fails: When the runtime tries to allocate a buffer that doesn’t fit in device memory, the allocator returns failure.
    Error is raised:
        JAX/XLA: You’ll see a RuntimeError or XlaRuntimeError with messages like RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED: Out of memory while trying to allocate …
        TensorFlow: ResourceExhaustedError: OOM when allocating tensor …
        PyTorch: torch.cuda.OutOfMemoryError with details about requested vs free memory.
    No automatic retry: There’s no built-in restart or automatic chunking. The offending compiled computation is aborted. Any partial intermediate results in device memory are discarded.
    Side effects:
        GPU memory can be left fragmented until the framework frees/caches blocks. Frameworks often use a caching allocator; after OOM, they may free some cached blocks, but you usually need to adjust your code or limits and rerun.
        If you were inside a larger training loop, that step fails; you typically catch the exception (if you wrote code to do so) or the program terminates.

How people recover:

    Reduce memory usage: smaller batch size, model size, precision (FP32 -> FP16/BF16), sequence length, etc.
    Enable gradient checkpointing/rematerialization in DL models.
    Rewrite the computation to avoid materializing huge intermediates (manual chunking/tiling).
    Use a memory-aware compiler/runtime (what the paper adds): set a memory budget so the compiler splits the graph into slices that fit, preventing OOM in the first place.
    Free memory between steps: clear caches, call torch.cuda.empty_cache() (PyTorch), or avoid holding onto tensors inadvertently.
    Move to a device with more memory or shard across devices.

Key point: Without explicit memory-aware handling, an OOM is a hard failure, not a soft restart.
GPT-5
37.85 tok/sec
440 tokens
Time-to-First: 1.2 sec
Your message:

this paper was written in 2022, how much have these methods have their way directly into xla
Attach
Assistant Reply:

Short answer: there isn’t a turnkey, upstream “memory budget + automatic graph-splitting” feature in open-source XLA today that matches the eXLA paper’s functionality end-to-end. Some ideas are partially reflected, but the specific passes/flags from the paper have not been adopted wholesale.

What has not made it in (as of 2025-09):

    No public XLA flags like --xla_tensor_size_threshold / --xla_tensor_split_size that enforce a global peak-memory budget and automatically rewrite large-tensor subgraphs into tiled while-loop slices across splittable axes.
    No documented, generic HLO pass that automatically splits big dot/reduce subgraphs to respect a user memory limit for single-device runs.

What is present/related in upstream OpenXLA/XLA:

    Memory-aware scheduling and fusion: XLA has a latency-hiding and memory scheduler and many fusion heuristics that can lower peak live memory, but these are heuristics for performance/memory, not a hard user budget you can set. See OpenXLA’s “XLA flags guidance” for scheduler/memory-related flags.
    Pattern-based improvements exist across the compiler, and backends sometimes lower pairwise distance-style expressions efficiently, but there isn’t a broad “linear-algebra tricks” match-and-rewrite library like the paper’s Euclidean distance rewrite advertised as a feature.
    Backend features that can reduce memory indirectly:
        Dot/dot fusion, reduce+broadcast fusion, and other GPU/TPU fusions that avoid materializing intermediates.
        Global cost models and improved fusion decisions (esp. on GPU) that can lower live memory.
        Async collectives, pipelining, and partitioning (SPMD/Shardy) for multi-device scaling; these help memory via sharding, but they’re distribution features, not single-device chunking under a budget.

How to get similar behavior today:

    Manual tiling/chunking in your framework code (JAX, TF, PyTorch/XLA), or use libraries like KeOps for pairwise ops.
    Use XLA’s existing memory/scheduler flags to coax lower peaks, but expect trial-and-error; there’s no guaranteed cap.
    For multi-device, use SPMD/sharding (e.g., GSPMD/Shardy) to spread memory across devices.

Bottom line:

    The paper’s core contribution—automatic graph splitting to respect a user-specified memory limit on a single device—remains an external prototype, not an integrated OpenXLA feature. XLA has continued to add many memory- and performance-related improvements, but not this specific, user-budgeted, compiler-driven tiling pass.

GPT-5
19.36 tok/sec
552 tokens
Time-to-First: 6.7 sec
1 tool call
Your message:

does pytorch have some of these optimizations?
Assistant Reply:

Short answer: Partially, but not the exact “user memory budget + automatic graph-splitting” that the paper proposes.

What PyTorch has today that helps with memory:

    Compiler optimizations in torch.compile/TorchInductor
        Fusion and better scheduling can lower peak live memory versus eager.
        CUDA Graphs integration and CUDAGraph Trees share a single memory pool across compiled regions to avoid duplicated pools and reduce peaks.
        Min-cut partitioning and selective recomputation in AOTAutograd reduce saved activations (activation checkpointing-style, but compiler-driven).
    Memory-efficient kernels and libraries
        Flash/memory-efficient attention, fused linear+CE (e.g., Liger), etc., which avoid large intermediates by tiling/chunking inside kernels.
    Tooling to understand and tune memory
        Memory Snapshot and Profiler timelines to find leaks and spikes.
    Distributed/sharded training (FSDP/ZeRO), offloading, mixed precision, etc., which reduce per-device memory.

What PyTorch does not provide (as of now):

    A general, upstream feature that lets you set a hard per-device memory budget and have the compiler automatically tile/split arbitrary subgraphs into bounded-size chunks (the core contribution of the paper).
    Pattern-based linear algebra rewrites across the board (like “replace n×m×d broadcast Euclidean distance with n×m trick”) at the framework compiler level; some exist in kernels/libs, but there isn’t a broad “LA tricks” pass exposed to users.

Bottom line:

    PyTorch has many memory-reducing compiler/runtime features and specialized kernels that often avoid OOMs.
    It does not yet have the paper’s generic “memory-budgeted graph-splitting” for single-device runs. You still typically rely on model/library-level chunking (e.g., memory-efficient attention), activation recompute, or manual tiling where needed.

GPT-5
11.57 tok/sec
401 tokens
Time-to-First: 1.0 sec
1 tool call
